integrate info from stubbed starburst-side doc (#3233)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/resource-configs/trino-configs.md

id: "trino-configs"
---

## Cluster requirements

> The designated cluster must have an attached catalog where ojects such as tables and views can be created, renamed, altered, and dropped. And, any user connecting to the cluster with dbt must also have these same permissions for the target catalog.

Reviewer: objects

Reviewer: Drop the "And,"

Author: ```suggestion
The designated cluster must have an attached catalog where objects such as tables and views can be created, renamed, altered, and dropped. Any user connecting to the cluster with dbt must also have these same permissions for the target catalog.
```

## Session properties

> In the Starburst/Trino environment, you can set session properties that modify the current session you have with the cluster. Refer to [Set Session](https://docs.starburst.io/latest/sql/set-session.html) in the Starburst/Trino docs for more details.

Reviewer: ```
With a Starburst Enterprise, Starburst Galaxy, or Trino cluster, you can [set session properties](https://trino.io/docs/current/sql/set-session.html) to modify the current configuration for your user session.
```

Author: ```suggestion
With a Starburst Enterprise, Starburst Galaxy, or Trino cluster, you can [set session properties](https://trino.io/docs/current/sql/set-session.html) to modify the current configuration for your user session.
```

> The standard way to define session properties is via the `session_properties` field of your `profiles.yml`. This ensures that all dbt connections use these settings by default.

Reviewer: is with the

Reviewer: Thats also a problem btw.. it affects all connections .. and therefore potentially different cluster ... not sure if it makes sense to use this as a general recommendation. wdyt @hovaesco ?

Reviewer 2: The general recommendation should be to setup as much as possible on the server side. Session properties would be only required in the specific use cases (not common I'd say).

Author: ```suggestion
The standard way to define session properties is with the `session_properties` field of your `profiles.yml`. This ensures that all dbt connections use these settings by default.
```

> However, to temporaily adjust these session properties for a specific dbt model or group of models, you can use a [dbt hook](/reference/resource-configs/pre-hook-post-hook) to set Starburst/Trino session properties on a specific dbt model. For example:

Reviewer: drop the `Starburst/Trino` .. its redundant here

Author: ```suggestion
However, to temporaily adjust these session properties for a specific dbt model or group of models, you can use a [dbt hook](/reference/resource-configs/pre-hook-post-hook) to set session properties on a specific dbt model. For example:
```

For details on what's supported for each supported data source, refer to either the [Trino Connectors](https://trino.io/docs/current/connector.html) or [Starburst Catalog](https://docs.starburst.io/starburst-galaxy/catalogs/).

### Hive catalogs

> At target catalog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.

Reviewer: The last sentence still needs to go .. but then this looks ready

Author: why?

For details on what's supported for each supported data source, refer to either the [Trino Connectors](https://trino.io/docs/current/connector.html) or [Starburst Catalog](https://docs.starburst.io/starburst-galaxy/catalogs/).

> ### Hive Catalog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hive catalogs
```

> At target cataog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is very typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.

Reviewer: catalog

Author: ```suggestion
At target catalog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.
```

> At target cataog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is very typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.

Reviewer: Drop "very"

> At target cataog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is very typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.

Reviewer: Last sentence should be removed

Author: why?

Reviewer: Because the properties are no longer there .. and this no longer applies.

> At target cataog that uses the Hive connector and a metastore service (HMS) is very typical when working with Starburst and dbt. The following settings are recommended for working with dbt. The intent is to ensure that dbt can perform the frequently executed `DROP` and `RENAME` statements.

Reviewer: Also .. this should probably be expanded to talk about Hive, Iceberg, and Delta Lake

Author: can this be addressed in a future PR?

```java
hive.metastore-cache-ttl=0s
hive.metastore-refresh-interval=5s

> hive.allow-drop-table=true

Reviewer: this is no longer true

Author: what's the suggestion? I copied and pasted this from your `dbt.md`

Reviewer: Remove .. that property is no longer exists

> hive.allow-drop-table=true
> hive.allow-rename-table=true

Author: ```suggestion
```

> hive.allow-rename-table=true

Reviewer: this is no longer true

Author: what's the suggestion? I copied and pasted this from your `dbt.md`

Reviewer: Remove .. that property is no longer exists

```

> ## File format configuration

Reviewer: This should be made more generic and talk about table properties probably

> When using file-based connectors such as Hive, a user can customize how to use certain 

Reviewer: Sentence is incomplete .. also not sure what you want to say..

Author: ```suggestion
When using file-based connectors such as Hive, a user can customize aspects of the connector such as the format that is used as well the type of materialization
```

> The below configures the data to materialize as a [Parquet](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/sql-data-sources-parquet.html) table with partitions.

Reviewer: There is no such thing as a Parquet table .. its a Parquet file.. or files in this context

Author: ```suggestion
The below configures the table to be materializes as a set of partitioned [Parquet](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/sql-data-sources-parquet.html) files.
```
